.TH SHADOWLISP 5
.SH NAME
\fBshadowlisp\fR \- a simple lisp dialect for writing \fIshadowenv\fR programs

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBShadowlisp\fR is a simple Lisp dialect. It is a Lisp-1, meaning that all data types (functions and variables,
notably) share a single namespace.

To express nil/null/no-value in Shadowlisp, use an empty list (). This will be important to clear environment variables.


.SH Environment Manipulation

.SS \fB(env/get \fIname\fB)\fR
The simplest function to interact with the environment is \fBenv/get\fR. It returns the current value of the variable at
the point in the script at which it's evaluated, not the initial value.

If the variable has no current value, \fB()\fR is returned instead of a String.

.TP
\fBname\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name of environment variable to look up

.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(Option<String>)\fR Current value of variable, or \fB()\fR if unset

.SS \fB(env/set \fIname value\fB)\fR
The simplest form of mutation: \fBenv/set\fR changes the value of an environment variable while a Shadowenv is active.
The previous value will be preserved so that it can be reactivated upon deactivating the Shadowenv.

.TP
\fBname\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name of environment variable to change

.TP
\fBvalue\fR
\fI(Option<String>)\fR String to set the variable to, or \fB()\fR to unset it.

.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(None)\fR Always returns \fB()\fR

.SS \fB(env/prepend-to-pathlist \fIname entry\fB)\fR

It's common to want to prepend an item to a \fB:\fR-delimited path (such as \fBPATH\fR or \fBMANPATH\fR).
\fBenv/prepend-to-pathlist\fR does precisely this, first removing the item from the path if it was
already present, before prepending it to the front of the pathlist.

Strictly speaking, any variable can be treated as a pathlist by Shadowenv, but it only makes sense
to do this for variables that other tools expect to contain multiple items.

If there are no items in the list currently, \fBenv/prepend-to-pathlist\fR will simply create the list with a single item.

.TP
\fBname\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name of environment variable to change

.TP
\fBentry\fR
\fI(String)\fR String to prepend

.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(None)\fR Always returns \fB()\fR

.SS \fB(env/append-to-pathlist \fIname entry\fB)\fR

While less common than prepending, it's sometimes desirable to append an item to a \fB:\fR-delimited path (such as \fBPATH\fR or
\fBMANPATH\fR), to add it as a lower priority option.  \fBenv/append-to-pathlist\fR does precisely this, first removing the item
from the path if it was already present, before appending it to the end of the pathlist.

Strictly speaking, any variable can be treated as a pathlist by Shadowenv, but it only makes sense
to do this for variables that other tools expect to contain multiple items.

If there are no items in the list currently, \fBenv/append-to-pathlist\fR will simply create the list with a single item.

.TP
\fBname\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name of environment variable to change

.TP
\fBentry\fR
\fI(String)\fR String to append


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(None)\fR Always returns \fB()\fR

.SS \fB(env/remove-from-pathlist \fIname entry\fB)\fR

The counterpart to \fBenv/prepend-to-pathlist\fR/\fBenv/append-to-pathlist\fR is this, \fBenv-remove-from-pathlist\fR. This won't be
as useful, since Shadowenv always takes care of its own deactivation, but you may occasionally want to
deactivate certain system-wide configuration upon entry into a Shadowenv.

If, after removing the indicated item from the specified pathlist, the variable becomes empty, it is
unset (equivalent to \fB(env/set var ())\fR).

.TP
\fBname\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name of environment variable to change

.TP
\fBentry\fR
\fI(String)\fR String to remove from pathlist


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(None)\fR Always returns \fB()\fR

.SS \fB(env/remove-from-pathlist-containing \fIname substring\fB)\fR

A specialized version of \fBenv/remove-from-pathlist\fR, \fBenv-remove-from-pathlist-containing\fR will
remove any items from the pathlist which contain the provided value as a substring.

.TP
\fBname\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name of environment variable to change

.TP
\fBsubstring\fR
\fI(String)\fR Remove pathlist items containing this as a substring


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(None)\fR Always returns \fB()\fR

.SH Utilities

.SS \fB(path-concat \fI[ strings ... ]\fB)\fR

It's occasionally useful to take a subdirectory of a path found from some other variable.
\fBpath-concat\fR joins two or more strings (representing directories) with slashes.

.TP
\fI:rest \fBstrings\fR
\fI(String)\fR Any number of strings to conjoin with \fB/\fR


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(String)\fR Joined path


.SS \fB(expand-path \fIpath\fB)\fR

\fBexpand-path\fR resolves a path to a canonicalized path, resolving any symlinks, relative references
from the present working directory, and \fB~\fR.

.TP
\fBpath\fR
\fI(String)\fR Path to expand


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(String)\fR Expanded path

.SS \fB(provide \fIfeature [ version ]\fB)\fR


Allows a script to advertise to the user which feature it is providing, with an optional version number.

Multiple features with the same are allowed.

.TP
\fBfeature\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name of the provided feature

.TP
\fBversion\fR
\fI(String)\fR Version of the provided feature. Optional.


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(None)\fR Always returns \fB()\fR

.SH Control Flow

.SS \fB(when \fIcondition [ then ... ]\fB)\fR

\fBwhen\fR tests a condition, evaluating the rest of its forms if and only if the condition is true.

.TP
\fBcondition\fR
\fI(Expr)\fR If it evaluates to non-\fB()\fR, run *then*

.TP
\fI:rest \fBthen\fR
\fI(Expr)\fR Evaluated if *condition* was true


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(Any)\fR Whatever the return value of the last form in *then* was


.SS \fB(when-let \fI( ( name expression ) ) [ body ... ]\fB)\fR

\fBwhen-let\fR evaluates some code if and only if a \fBlet\fR binding, when run, assigns a non-\fB()\fR value
to the name.

.TP
\fBname\fR
\fI(String)\fR Name to assign

.TP
\fBexpression\fR
\fI(Any)\fR Value to assign to name

.TP
\fI:rest \fBbody\fR
\fI(Expr)\fR Evaluated if *name* was assigned to something non-\fB()\fR


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(Any)\fR Whatever the return value of the last form in *body* was

.SS \fB(if \fIcondition then-case [ else-case ]\fB)\fR

The \fBif\fR operator evaluates its first argument, then evaluates only one of the
given branches, depending on the result. The "else" branch may be omitted,
in which case, \fBif\fR will yield \fB()\fR when the condition is \fBfalse\fR.

.SS \fB(cond \fI[ ( predicate branch ) ... ] [ ( else else-branch ) ] \fB)\fR

The \fBcond\fR operator evaluates a series of predicates and executes the branch
for the first predicate which evaluates to true. The name \fBelse\fR may be used for
the last case, as a catch-all branch.

.SS \fB(do \fI[ expressions ... ]\fB)\fR


The do operator executes multiple expressions and yields the value of the final expression. Useful
for forms like \fBlet\fR, which only accept one form to evaluate.

.TP
\fI:rest \fBexpressions\fR
\fI(Expr)\fR Always evaluated


.TP
\fBReturn\fR
\fI(Any)\fR Whatever the return value of the last form in *expressions* was

.SH Logic

.SS \fB(eq \fIa b\fB)\fR

Test whether two values are (weakly) equal. Shadowlisp does not support strict equality semantics.

.SS \fB(ne \fIa b\fB)\fR

Test whether two values are (weakly) unequal. Shadowlisp does not support strict equality semantics.

.SS \fB(not \fIa\fB)\fR

Boolean negation.

.SS \fB(null \fIexpr\fB)\fR

Returns true if and only if the provided argument is \fB()\fR.

.SS \fB(and \fI[ expression ... ]\fB)\fR

\fBand\fR evaluates its arguments, applying logical AND short-circuiting rules.

.SS \fB(or \fI[ expression ... ]\fB)\fR

\fBor\fR evaluates its arguments, applying logical OR short-circuiting rules.

.SH Lists

.SS \fB(append \fIlist value\fB)\fR

\fBappend\fR appends a value to a list.

.SS \fB(elt \fIlist n\fB)\fR

\fBelt\fR returns the nth element of a list.

.SS \fB(concat \fI[ list ... ]\fB)\fR

\fBconcat\fR concatenates each given list value.

.SS \fB(join \fIsep [ list ... ]\fB)\fR

\fBjoin\fR joins together a series of lists using the first argument as separator.

.SS \fB(first \fIlist\fB)\fR

\fBfirst\fR returns the first element of a list.

.SS \fB(last \fIlist\fB)\fR

\fBlast\fR returns the last element of a list.

.SS \fB(tail \fIlist\fB)\fR

\fBtail\fR returns all elements after the first element of a list.

.SS \fB(list \fI[ expr ... ]\fB)\fR

\fBlist\fR evaluates each of its arguments and return them as a list.

.SH Functions and Macros

.SS \fB(define \fIname expression\fB)\fR

The \fBdefine\fR operator adds a value or compiled function to the global scope.

When defining a function, if the keyword \fB:optional\fR is present in the argument
list, all following arguments will be optional. If the keyword \fB:key\fR is present,
all following arguments will be optional keyword arguments. If the keyword
\fB:rest\fR is present, the following name will contain any free arguments remaining.

Optional and keyword arguments may be omitted when calling a function.
If an optional or keyword value is not supplied its value will be \fB()\fR.
A default value can be given when the function is defined.

.SS \fB(macro \fI(name [ arguments ... ]) expression\fB)\fR

The \fBmacro\fR operator defines a compile-time macro. A macro behaves in all
respects as any other function, except that it is executed at compile time
and is expected to return code which is then further compiled.

.SS \fB(lambda \fI( [ arguments ... ] ) expression\fB)\fR

The \fBlambda\fR operator creates a function which may enclose one or more local
value bindings from the surrounding scope.

.SS \fB(apply \fIfunction [ arguments ... ] argument-list\fB)\fR

The \fBapply\fR operator calls a function with a given series of arguments.
The argument list consists of any positional arguments except for the last
argument to \fBapply\fR, plus the final, required list argument, which is
concatenated to positional arguments.

.SS \fB(let \fI( [ ( name expression ) ... ] ) body\fB)\fR

The \fBlet\fR operator defines a series of local bindings for the duration of the
execution of its body expression.
