.TH SHADOWENV 1
.SH NAME
shadowenv \- maninpulate environment variables as you change directories
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBshadowenv\fR [\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-V\fR] \fIsubcommand\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBshadowenv\fR provides a way to perform a set of manipulations to the process environment upon entering a directory in a shell. These manipulations are reversed when leaving the directory, and there is some limited ability to make the manipulations dynamic.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS \fBdiff\fR [\fB\-hnv\fR]
Display a diff of changed environment variables.

.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-no\-color\fR
Do not use color to highlight the diff

.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
Show all environment variables as context to the diff

.SS \fBexec\fR [\fB--dir\fR <\fBdir\fR>] <\fBchild-argv0\fR|\fB-- child-argv...\fR>
Execute a command after loading the environment from the current directory.

.TP
\fB\-\-dir\fR <\fBdir\fR>
Instead of searching from the current directory for a .shadowenv.d, search from this one.

.TP
\fBchild-argv0\fR
If the command doesn't need arguments, it can be passed directly as the last arugment.

.TP
\fBchild-argv...\fR
If the command requires arguments, they must all be passed after a '--'.

.SS \fBhook\fR [FLAGS] [OPTIONS]
Runs the shell hook. You shouldn't need to run this manually; instead, source the output of \fBshadowenv init\fR to create the shell hooks that will use this command.

.TP
\fB\-\-fish\fR
Format variable assignments for fish shell

.TP
\fB\-\-porcelain\fR
Format variable assignments for machine parsing

.TP
\fB\-\-silent\fR
Suppress error printing

.TP
\fB\-\-shellpid\fR \fIpid\fR
Rather than looking up the PPID, use this as the shell's pid

.SS \fBinit\fR \fIshell\fR
Prints a script which can be eval'd to set up shadowenv in various shells

.TP
\fBbash\fR
Prints a script which can be eval'd by bash to set up shadowenv.

.TP
\fBfish\fR
Prints a script which can be eval'd by fish to set up shadowenv.

.TP
\fBzsh\fR
Prints a script which can be eval'd by zsh to set up shadowenv.

.SS \fBtrust\fR
Mark this directory as 'trusted', allowing shadowenv programs to be run
.SH FLAGS
.SS -h, --help
Prints help information - can also be used for more specific help with any of the subcommands
.SS -V, --version
Prints the current shadowenv version
